Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
talking about a scandalous tale of
expensive tastes, fast cars, gambling,
and a high-flying British aristocrat’s
involvement in one of Britain’s
most infamous unsolved murders.
This is the story of Lord Lucan,
the British peer and gambling
addict who disappeared after his
nanny was found brutally murdered.
It’s a case and, crucially, a
disappearance, that still fascinates
people to this very day, and has led
to countless theories and supposed
sightings all over the world.
OK then, let’s get into it and
talk about Lord Lucan - the British
aristocrat suspected of murder who
disappeared, never to be seen again.
It was a quiet evening on
the 7th of November, 1974.
London’s Belgravia neighbourhood, one of
the city’s most exclusive, was calm and
quiet, the rows of whitewashed terrace
houses lit up by lights of activity.
Suddenly, the air was filled
with frantic breathing and the
pitter-patter of footsteps.
On Lower Belgrave Street, a woman sprinted
past, a look of panic across her face.
She was barefoot and covered in blood.
Searching desperately for
help, the first place she saw
was a pub, the Plumbers Arms.
She burst into the bar.
“Help me, help me,” she cried.
“I have just escaped from a murderer.
He’s in my house.
He murdered the nanny.”
As the barman tried to calm the
woman down, the punters, the people
drinking in the bar, turned in
shock at what they were seeing.
This poor woman, they thought.
But little did they know that they
had just witnessed the first step, the
first clue, in one of the most infamous
unsolved murder cases in British history.
This woman was no ordinary
punter, no ordinary lady.
She was Lady Lucan, the wife of one of
the country’s most flamboyant aristocrats.
But before we get into the events
of that fateful night, we should
first consider a bit of background.
Lord Lucan was born Richard John
Bingham on the 18th of December, 1934,
in London, to the English-Irish peer
George Bingham, the 6th Earl of Lucan,
and Kaitlin Elizabeth Anne Dawson.
A peer, by the way, is someone in Britain
with an official title, such as duke,
marquess, earl, viscount or baron.
Though peers can be appointed
by the government, often these
titles are hereditary - they are
passed down from father to son,
passed down through the family.
They are, essentially, status symbols
among the British aristocracy.
And this young Lord Lucan, although
he wasn’t actually a Lord or a Lucan
until his father died, this young man
enjoyed a very privileged childhood.
For the ease of the story, by the
way, I will refer to him as ”Lord”
Lucan or simply Lucan throughout this
episode, so as to avoid using two
names to describe the same one man.
During the Second World War, Lucan
and his siblings were evacuated,
moved to safety, first to Wales and
then to the United States where they
stayed with a multi-millionairess
and continued their lives of luxury.
When they eventually returned to
England, however, the young Lord Lucan
had a bit of a shock at the state of
post-war England and bomb-ridden London.
But for a young man like Lucan, he
lived in a completely different world.
He went to school at the prestigious
Eton College, where he mingled
with other society high-fliers and
developed a taste for, a interest
in, a vice that would remain with him
for the rest of his life: gambling.
As a young man, he was known to
be charming, tall, and handsome,
with a rather impressive moustache.
What’s more, he was very very wealthy.
He lived a life of total luxury, and
enjoyed the ‘finer things in life’, we
might say - fast cars, speedboats, the
best wines and Russian vodkas, which
were still pretty exotic at the time.
Or as The New York Times put it, Lucan
was - and I'm quoting directly - a
"dashing British aristocrat… known for
his prowess at backgammon and bridge
and his fondness for vodka martinis,
powerboats, and Aston Martin cars."
In fact, Lucan was such a slick
character that it's believed he
almost played the role of James Bond.
He looked a bit like James Bond,
and it certainly didn’t hurt that
he was also a close friend of Ian
Fleming, the author of the books.
He was also in the army briefly, serving
in West Germany, where he began playing
poker and further developed the unhealthy
gambling habit he had picked up at Eton.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, given his love for
gambling, he would then begin a career in
banking in 1954, when he was 20 years old.
And although he was on a very
healthy salary, and would have
been a multi-millionaire by today’s
standards, Lucan increasingly gambled
in his free time, playing lots of
backgammon and poker in particular.
But he had a bit of a sudden career
change in 1960, after a huge win
playing baccarat, a type of card game.
Lucan reportedly won £26,000 in just
two days, and though that might not
sound like an astronomical amount,
especially to someone who already came
from such privilege, it’s worth almost
a million Euros in today’s money.
Certainly not bad for two days
of work, and it was enough for
Lord Lucan to quit his job in the
bank and focus on his passion, or
perhaps his addiction: gambling.
He became a full-time gambler and was
known as ‘Lucky Lucan’ in the elite
gambling circles, but he quickly
transformed into what has been described
as a ‘compulsive gambler’, spending most
of his time at the Clermont Club, an
exclusive gentlemen’s club in Mayfair.
Gambling, to put it bluntly, became his
entire life, although he would forever
be chasing a win as large as the one
that convinced him to quit his day job.
A few years later, in November of
1963, just before his 30th birthday,
the eligible bachelor married a
lady called Veronica Duncan in
a ceremony that was attended by
minor members of the Royal Family.
But it wasn’t exactly a natural match.
Their honeymoon, which was a trip to
Istanbul on the exclusive Orient Express,
ended ahead of schedule because, according
to Lady Lucan, “there seemed little to
talk about and I longed to go home”.
“John,” she said, meaning Lord
Lucan, “he was lost in thought
and seemed a little bored.”
It was certainly an ominous start.
A couple of months later, in January of
1964, Lucan’s father died and he formally
inherited the title “Lord” Lucan, and
along with it around a quarter of a
million pounds, which would be around
five million Euros in today’s money.
But the money went out as fast
as it came in, and he was losing
vast amounts at the card table.
On one occasion, he reportedly lost
£8,000, almost €150,000 in today’s
money, and this was in a single evening.
A short while later, Lord Lucan, Lady
Lucan, and their three children, Frances,
George and Camilla, they moved into a
new house, 46 Lower Belgrave Street,
which, conveniently for Lucan, was only
a short walk from the Clermont Club.
By this stage, his gambling habit was
well-known and accepted, and Lady Lucan
has described her role as one of “a
gambler’s wife” and of needing to, and
I’m quoting directly, “help him get out
of a backgammon game when he was winning.”
In other words, it was her job to
try to make sure he quit while he was
ahead and not lose too much money.
Now, it’s important to note here that
although Lord Lucan might have had, on
the surface, an enviable life, everything
a man could ever want, behind closed
doors, in private, things weren’t quite
so rosy, they weren’t going quite so well.
Lucky Lucan, as it turned out, wasn’t
quite so lucky after all, and was
amassing enormous gambling debts.
That £8,000 loss in a single night
wasn’t a one-off, and as he lost
more and more he was forced to begin
borrowing money from friends and family.
Key to understanding this story,
this murder, and this disappearance,
however, is the role of Lady Lucan
and their deteriorating marriage.
His wife, Lady Lucan, had given
birth to three children in six years,
from 1964 to 1970, and had suffered
from severe postnatal depression.
Her husband was little help.
He fell deeper and deeper into gambling
debts, spending more and more time
at his club and drinking more and
more, he failed to understand what was
happening to his wife or support her,
and the marriage began to fall apart.
A few years later, by 1973, the marriage
had collapsed and Lord Lucan had moved
out of Lower Belgrave Street and into
a flat on Elizabeth Street, just around
the corner, and importantly, still a
short distance from the Clermont Club.
Lady Lucan was in a fragile mental
state, and was being treated
with various antidepressants.
As a result, to help out around the
house and care for the children the
following summer she hired a nanny, a
29-year-old lady named Sandra Rivett.
But that's when things start to get
a little nasty, little unpleasant.
When his wife was given custody
of the children, Lord Lucan
was outraged and his behaviour
became obsessive and threatening.
He hired private detectives to spy on
his soon-to-be ex-wife, hoping that
they’d uncover some damaging evidence
about her mental instability so that he
could win back custody of his children.
His car was regularly seen outside
the Lower Belgrave Street home, and
friends of Lord Lucan even claimed that
he said he was planning to kill her.
And he thought he would get
away with it, because of who
he was and his social status.
So, what actually happened?
And what has the nanny, Sandra
Rivett, got to do with all this?
Well, it's all a little murky, a
little unclear, but here is what
is believed to have happened.
Facing growing gambling debts,
drinking more and more and having
lost custody of his children, it's
thought that on the night of November
7th, 1974, Lord Lucan broke into his
former home on Lower Belgrave Street.
At the house were the children, the
nanny, Sandra Rivett, and Lady Lucan.
Some time around 9pm, after the children
had been put to bed, Sandra Rivett,
the nanny, offered to make a cup of
tea for Lady Lucan, and went down into
the building’s dimly lit basement.
Lord Lucan, so the theory goes,
then sprung out from the shadows
and beat the woman to death
with a piece of lead piping.
Back upstairs, and wondering why her
cup of tea was taking so long, Lady
Lucan eventually went downstairs
and stumbled upon the bloody scene.
And as you heard at the start of the
episode, Lucan then allegedly attacked
his wife before she managed to escape
to the Plumber’s Arms pub down the road.
It's generally accepted, believed, that
Lucan had been expecting his estranged
wife to come downstairs, not the nanny,
and that she had been the intended victim.
He had been planning to kill Lady
Lucan, dispose of her body and
take back the children and house.
Now, based on what we know of Lucan’s
mental state at the time, and their
deteriorating marriage, this certainly
seems like a plausible theory.
So, what happened?
What did Lord Lucan
have to say about this?
Did he deny it, what was his defence?
Well, he said nothing.
As you might have guessed from the
title of this episode, Lord Lucan
disappeared and was never seen again,
resulting in one of the biggest murder
mysteries in modern British history.
We do know something of his movements
immediately after the murder, however.
It's thought that he drove 70 kilometres
to a friend's house in a village in
Sussex, close to London, but only
stayed for a few hours and left
in the early hours of the morning.
His story, his cover, according to
friends, was that he had walked in
on his wife being attacked by another
mystery man and that he was now hiding
because his wife had accused him of
hiring a hitman, a contract killer.
But after that, we know very little.
Three days later, on November the 10th,
his bloodstained car was found abandoned
– with a piece of lead piping in the
boot – at the port in Newhaven, near
Brighton, on the south coast of England.
After that, nobody to this very day
knows what happened to Lord Lucan.
Well, nobody publicly
knows anything about it.
And, as you might imagine, this has led
to a whole host of theories about what
happened to him, where he went, and
whether he is, in fact, still alive.
In fact, over the years there have
been countless - as many as 70,
according to some sources - supposed
‘sightings’ of Lucan around the world
in places as far-flung as Australia,
India, France, and Mozambique.
Although in 1999 he was declared
‘legally dead’ and a death certificate
was officially issued in 2016, his body
has never been found, so nobody can say
for sure whether he’s dead or alive.
The first supposed sighting came
in January of 1975, in Melbourne,
Australia, and he was also allegedly
seen in northwest France in the
year or so after the murder.
People also claimed to have seen him in
Mozambique and Zimbabwe, and there was
even a theory that he was living in India
as a beach hippy called "Jungle Barry.”
Some of the other whacky theories include
that Lord Lucan was held to ransom by the
Irish Republican Army and, incredibly,
that he had shot himself and his remains
were fed to the tigers in an English
zoo immediately after the murder.
And there’s more.
Police have investigated fingerprints
on beer glasses in South Africa,
and tracked money moving to
bank accounts in Latin America.
People have claimed to see Lucan at
an ex-Nazi colony in Paraguay, living
in a car in New Zealand, and even
working as a waiter in California.
And the mystery of Lord Lucan
continues to this very day,
almost 50 years after the murder.
In 2022, a facial recognition
specialist claimed that a photo of
an elderly man living in Australia
is an exact match for Lord Lucan.
Could he have escaped and been
living in Australia all these years?
Using artificial intelligence to
cross-reference photos of Lord Lucan
with this old man in Australia, the
specialist concluded that, and I’m
quoting directly, “they produced a match.
This isn’t an opinion, it’s
science and mathematical fact”.
Some say, however, that the most
likely scenario is that he took a
ferry from Newhaven just days after
the murder, jumped off the boat,
committing suicide, and his body was
lost at sea, forever consigned to Davy
Jones’ Locker, as a sailor might say.
The only truth of this murder mystery,
of this ‘whodunnit’, as we say in
England, is that nobody knows for
sure what happened to Lord Lucan.
It was a real-life murder mystery,
a real life game of Cluedo, complete
with “lead piping”, one of the murder
weapons used in the game of Cluedo.
As a quick reminder, or if you didn't
know, Cluedo is a popular board game
where players try to solve a murder
mystery by guessing the character, murder
weapon and room where the crime occurred.
And in fact, the parallels between
the real-life case of Lord Lucan and
the game of Cluedo aren’t limited
to the discovery of the lead piping.
Incredibly, in what seems like fiction
but was in fact real life, in 2022
it was reported that investigators
didn’t only find the lead piping
in Lucan’s car in Newhaven.
According to the British press,
investigators also found cards
from the game of Cluedo in the car.
And it gets weirder.
Which cards did they find?
Colonel Mustard, a lead
pipe, and the hall.
And why is this particularly strange?
Colonel Mustard is a dashing military
character with a large moustache,
not too dissimilar to Lord Lucan’s
own; his weapon was exactly the
same; and the ‘hall’ location is the
closest to the cellar in the game.
In a further twist, police revealed that
these three cards were also found to
be missing from Lucan’s own Cluedo set.
So, what does this all mean?
Was it Lord Lucan taunting, or mocking,
the police before making his escape?
Was he framed by someone else?
Or was someone trying
to play a “funny” trick?
It seems quite clear that the murder
was committed by this man, by Lucan,
and an innocent young life was taken.
If he wasn’t the killer, then his
disappearance is most suspicious.
But as to what happened next, and to the
question of what actually happened to Lord
Lucan, well unless something drastically
changes, then this is a mystery that
will most likely forever remain unsolved.
Ok then, that is it for today’s episode
on the disappearance of Lord Lucan.
I hope it was an interesting one,
and whether you knew the story
before, or this was the first time
you’d ever heard anything about Lord
Lucan and this murder mystery, well
I hope you learned something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
Had you heard about Lord Lucan before?
What do you think really happened
that night in Lower Belgrave Street?
And where do you think he went?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.